<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<chapter version="5.0"
    xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
    xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
    xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude">
  <title>AutoCAD Integration</title>
  <section>
    <title>Introduction</title>
    <para>
      Programs that depend on ObjectARX, the API that Autodesk provides
      for extending AutoCAD, can be difficult to test because ObjectARX
      imposes several restrictions on applications that depend on it:
    </para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem><para>The ObjectARX API is only usuable within an "ObjectARX
        Host Application" such as AutoCAD or one of its product verticals.
        </para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>The ObjectARX API can only be accessed by a single thread
        at a time. Additionally, many operations such as calling the destructor
        on an AcDbObject must be performed on a specific thread provided by the
        host application.
        </para></listitem>
      <listitem><para>The ObjectARX API makes use of Microsoft's OpenMP implementation.
        This implementation does not allow for non-default AppDomains to be
        created within the same process that OpenMP (vcomp.dll) is loaded in.
        </para></listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    <para>
      Gallio's AutoCAD support allows for tests to be run within this set of
      restrictions.
    </para>
  </section>
  <section>
    <title>Using the AutoCAD Test Runner</title>
    <para>
      The AutoCAD test runner is not a full-fledged test runner such as Icarus
      or Echo. Instead it enables the actual test runner to perform the run
      within AutoCAD.
    </para>
    <para>
      To use the AutoCAD test runner specify "AutoCAD" as the runner type. This
      option is only be available on systems that have Gallio's AutoCAD
      integration components installed.
    </para>
    <para>
      The runner type is specified in different ways depending on the
      test runner used.  In Gallio Icarus, it appears as a preference item
      in the GUI.  With Gallio Echo, it appears as a command-line argument.
      Likewise the MSBuild, NAnt and PowerShell tasks accept a runner type
      as an argument.  Refer to the documentation of your test runner for
      more information.
    </para>
    <para>
      The following example shows how to run tests from the command-line
      using AutoCAD.
    </para>
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>Gallio.Echo</command>
      <arg rep='norepeat' choice='req'>/runnerType:AutoCAD</arg>
      <arg rep='repeat' choice='plain'><replaceable>paths-to-test-assemblies</replaceable></arg>
    </cmdsynopsis>
    <section>
      <title>How Gallio Finds AutoCAD</title>
      <para>
        Gallio finds AutoCAD by looking in the Windows registry to see what
        AutoCAD application is registered to handle the .DWG file extension.
        Typically this is whatever instance of AutoCAD ran most recently. If
        you have multiple versions of AutoCAD installed and want to test with
        a specific one, run the one you want before starting your tests.
      </para>
    </section>
  </section>
</chapter>
