<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<chapter version="5.0"
    xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
    xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
    xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude">
  <title>About MbUnit</title>
  <section>
    <title>What is MbUnit?</title>
    <para>
      MbUnit is a unit testing framework in the tradition of xUnit frameworks
      such as JUnit.  In addition, MbUnit includes a rich suite of features
      designed to simplify other automation tasks that arise during
      integration testing.
    </para>
    <para>
      MbUnit was originally created in 2005 by Jonathan "Peli" de Halleux.
      It introduced and popularized novel ideas such as "RowTests" and
      "CombinatorialTests".
    </para>
    <para>
      The present incarnation of MbUnit, MbUnit v3, represents a complete
      rewrite and redesign of Peli's original work to improve the end-user
      experience, consolidate features, enhance extensibility,
      and enable advanced integration testing and reporting.  From this synthesis,
      Gallio was born.
    </para>
    <para>
      For more information about the early history of MbUnit, refer to the
      introductory chapter about Gallio.
    </para>
  </section>
  <section>
    <title>MbUnit v2 vs. MbUnit v3</title>
    <para>
      The subject of this section is MbUnit v3.  However, we will
      occasionally refer to the older MbUnit v2.  This section will explain
      a few of the differences between these versions.
    </para>
    <para>
      MbUnit v3 is a .Net 2.0 based framework.  It uses generic types
      and methods where possible to encourage code reuse.  It also provides
      additional features for .Net 3.5 clients in a separate assembly.
      MbUnit v3 leverages the Gallio test automation platform heavily to
      provide integration with numerous other tools and to enable functionality
      such as rich reporting.
    </para>
    <para>
      MbUnit v2 is a .Net 1.1 based framework with a few .Net 2.0 add-ons.
      It is stand-alone framework that includes its own suite of test runners.
      Gallio includes an adapter plugin so that Gallio-based tools may also
      be used with MbUnit v2 (when running tests in a .Net 2.0 environment).
      However, since MbUnit v2 was not originally designed for Gallio, it
      does not provide as many advanced features as MbUnit v3.
    </para>
    <para>
      MbUnit v2 is being maintained concurrently with MbUnit v3 for the benefit
      of existing projects based on MbUnit v2 that have not yet migrated to
      MbUnit v3.  For new projects, we recommend adopting MbUnit v3.
    </para>
    <para>
      MbUnit v3 is mostly backwards compatible with MbUnit v2 except for some
      APIs that have been renamed or redesigned.  Transitioning
      to MbUnit v2 is relatively straightforward.
    </para>
    <para>
      For more information about the differences between MbUnit v2 and v3,
      please refer to the Migration Guide chapter.
    </para>
  </section>
  <section>
    <title>Feature Matrix</title>
    <para>
    TODO
    </para>
  </section>
  <section>
    <title>Requirements</title>
    <para>
    .Net 2.0 runtime (CLR or Mono)
    </para>
    <para>
    TODO
    </para>
  </section>
</chapter>
