<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<chapter version="5.0"
  xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook"
  xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
  xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude">
  <title>Understanding the Gallio Architecture</title>
  <para>Gallio, as a platform, is built up in layers.</para>
  <para>
    TODO, include diagram here...
  </para>
  <section>
    <title>Gallio Runtime</title>
    <para>
      The Gallio Runtime is the subsystem responsible for initializing Gallio-based applications such as
      test runners, managing global configuration parameters, loading plugins, and enumerating services.
      It binds the whole platform together.
    </para>
    <para>
      At its core, the runtime is essentially a service locator or inversion of control container.  It reads declarations of
      components from plugin metadata files and provides a factory for instantiating them on demand.  It also
      tracks the lifecycle of components such that they can be decommissioned (disposed) gracefully
      upon shutdown.
    </para>
    <section>
      <title>Services and Components</title>
      <para>
        <termdef>A <firstterm>service</firstterm> is a description of an interface (contract) that may be
          implemented by one or more components.  A service may specify that its components are required
          to provide declarative metadata in addition to executable code.  Metadata is used to describe
          properties of a component without having to load its code.  It may also be used to specify
          activation criteria for the component.</termdef>
        <termdef>A <firstterm>component</firstterm> is a class that implements the operations
        described by a given service.  A component may also include metadata.</termdef>
      </para>
      <para>
        For example, Gallio's core library declares a service that describes an interface for a test framework
        and its metadata.  Each test framework plugin then defines a component to provide a
        reference to its executable code along with its name, description, version and an icon.
      </para>
      <para>
        The runtime is optimized to defer the instantiation of components until they are needed.  This
        helps Gallio to minimize its startup time and footprint even in situations where many plugins have
        been installed but are not yet required for execution.
      </para>
    </section>
    <section>
      <title>Plugins</title>
      <para>
        <termdef>A <firstterm>plugin</firstterm> is a unit of extension supported by the runtime.</termdef>
        <termdef>A <firstterm>plugin manifest</firstterm> is a simple XML file that defines the
          services and components that constitute a plugin.  XML is used specifically to avoid having
          to load plugin assemblies until they are required for execution.</termdef>
        <termdef>A <firstterm>plugin assembly</firstterm> is a .Net assembly that extends the Gallio
        Platform in some way by providing executable code and resources associated with services or components.</termdef>
      </para>
      <para>
        A plugin is generally represented as a collection of files including a plugin manifest, one or more plugin
        assemblies and additional resources as required.  This layout is described in a later
        section.
      </para>
    </section>
    <section>
      <title>The Runtime Lifecycle</title>
      <para>
        Applications based on the Gallio Platform must initialize the Runtime before calling into
        most Gallio services.  When the runtime is initialized, Gallio populates its list of
        services but it does not instantiate them until they are needed.
      </para>
      <para>
        While an application runs, it has free access to all runtime services.  The following basic
        operations are provided: getting descriptions of plugins, services and components;
        activating and deactivating plugins; resolving components; obtaining plugin resources. 
      </para>
      <para>
        When an application is about to exit, it should dispose the runtime.  This ensures that
        Gallio services are shut down appropriately.
      </para>
      <example>
        <title>Using the Runtime</title>
        <programlisting language="C#"><![CDATA[
          Runtime.Initialize(NullLogger.Instance);
          
          IMyService component = Runtime.Components
            .Where(componentDescription => componentDescription.Metadata["Name"] == "Foo")
            .Resolve<IMyService>();
          component.DoSomething();

          Runtime.Shutdown();
          ]]>
        </programlisting>
      </example>
    </section>
  </section>
</chapter>
