<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<preface version="5.0" xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" xml:id="preface">
  <title>Preface</title>
  <blockquote>
    <attribution>Scott Hanselman, Microsoft</attribution>
    <para>MbUnit is unit testing on crack.</para>
  </blockquote>
  <para> In the world of software development, the concept of <glossterm linkend="glossary_tdd">test-driven
      development</glossterm> (<acronym>TDD</acronym>) is not a new one. Conceived in 1999 as part
    of the <glossterm linkend="glossary_ExtremeProgramming">Extreme Programming</glossterm> process, its popularity within the .NET world
    began to rise in October 2002 when <glossterm linkend="glossary_nUnit">nUnit</glossterm> v2.0 was released. A completely
    reworked version of <glossterm linkend="glossary_jUnit">jUnit</glossterm> written entirely in C#, it started many .NET
    developers down the agile programming path. It was simple to learn, easy to use, and quite
    versatile. However, just as nUnit had many advantages, it also had several disadvantages and
    other viable test frameworks such as <glossterm linkend="glossary_MbUnit">MbUnit</glossterm> and
      <glossterm linkend="glossary_xUnit">xUnit</glossterm> have emerged. </para>
  <para> MbUnit began life in 2004 when Marc Clifton wrote a series of articles proposing the
    formalization of various test patterns beyond basic test-driven development. A young developer
    by the name of <emphasis role="italic">Jonathan “Peli” de Halleux</emphasis> read them while
    recovering from surgery and proceeded to write the first prototype of MbUnit (or
      <glossterm linkend="glossary_gUnit">gUnit</glossterm> as it was first called) before he had left hospital. MbUnit
    wasn’t designed as a replacement for nUnit, but thanks to very smart developers such as
      <emphasis role="italic">Jamie Cansdale</emphasis> and <emphasis role="italic">Andy
      Stopford</emphasis>, it became a definite, more powerful alternative to its kindred framework. </para>
  <para> In Autumn 2007, a new face took the reins of the MbUnit project – <emphasis role="italic"
      >Jeff Brown</emphasis> – and started a ground-up rewrite of MbUnit as two separate projects.
      <emphasis role="bold">MbUnit v3</emphasis> would remain the test framework that developers
    knew and used, but the automation platform underneath the framework was to be isolated and made
    framework-neutral. This new platform, codenamed <emphasis role="bold"
        ><glossterm linkend="glossary_Gallio">Gallio</glossterm></emphasis> (because of a typo), would aim to run any
    framework’s tests – for example nUnit, <glossterm linkend="glossary_nBehave">nBehave</glossterm> or
      <glossterm linkend="glossary_csUnit">csUnit</glossterm> – and allow them to be run from any host – for example
      <glossterm linkend="glossary_Resharper">Resharper</glossterm>, <glossterm
        linkend="glossary_TeamCity">TeamCity</glossterm> or <glossterm>Visual
      Studio</glossterm>. It was agreed that in doing this, other open-source and commercial
    projects would be able to leverage the platform’s services to create rich, interoperable and
    extensible testing solutions, thereby adding great value to the community. Going forward, the
    Gallio project continues to become visible to other open source projects so that the
    capabilities of the platform can bring unity and value to the many projects in the testing
    space. </para>
  <para> This book is written to document the <emphasis role="italic">3.1</emphasis> series of the
    MbUnit test framework and Gallio Automation Platform. We have made every attempt to make it as
    accurate as possible. However, both projects are in active development, so while we will attempt
    to keep this text up to date with the software, please note that future versions may change some
    of the functionality detailed in this text. </para>
  <section xml:id="preface_AimOfTheBook">
    <title>The Aim Of This Book</title>
    <para> This book has two aims:</para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>to bring the reader up to speed with the capabilities of MbUnit v3 and Gallio</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>to make it easier to start contributing back to the project</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    <para>It is not our intention to look at the theory of unit testing or the application generic
      unit test patterns to your own applications beyond the basic introduction to test-driven
      development given in <xref linkend="chapter_MyFirstTests"/>.</para>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_WhoShouldReadThisBook">
    <title>Who Should Read This Book?</title>
    <para> This book is aimed at .NET developers with an interest in writing tests for their
      applications. It is written on the premise that the reader is coming to unit testing for the
      first time. Those readers who have used nUnit or MbUnit v2 before will be able to use our
        <xref linkend="appendix_MigrationGuide"/> as a quick reference to find the information they
      need to use MbUnit v3. All our examples will initially be written in C# and subsequently
      translated into Visual Basic .NET, F# and whatever other flavours of CLR language people
      kindly volunteer to translate them into. </para>
    <para> Even if you don’t intend to use MbUnit as your test framework, you might still want to
      use Gallio to run your tests, so you may also find parts of the text useful. Similarly, while
      Gallio does allow for the running of tests within other applications, we’ll focus on using the
      two applications it ships with to run tests: </para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para><firstterm linkend="glossary_Echo">Echo</firstterm> is a command-line based application</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para><firstterm linkend="glossary_Icarus">Icarus</firstterm> is a GUI-based application</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    <para>Note also that the source code examples used throughout the book are only examples. While
      they will compile with the proper compiler incantations, they are intended to illustrate a
      particular scenario and not necessarily to serve as examples of good programming style or
      practices.</para>
    <para> Books like Roy Osherove’s <link xmlns:ns1="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
        ns1:href="http://www.manning.com/osherove/">The Art Of Unit Testing</link> and Gerard
      Meszaros’s <link xmlns:ns1="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" ns1:href="http://xunitpatterns.com"
        >Unit Test Patterns</link> teach various types of testing so rather than be a full-on
      introduction to testing in general, it will stay very specific to what is available in MbUnit
      v3 supported by Gallio. </para>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_HowToReadThisBook">
    <title>How To Read This Book</title>
    <para> Because this book is aimed at several different groups of readers, the structure of this
      book is aimed at what we perceive to be the largest of these groups – the newcomer to
        test-driven development who wants to writes tests and learn by doing.
      That doesn’t preclude anyone else from reading this however and we’d suggest the following
      routes through the book for various types of readers: </para>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>Newcomers to Test-Driven Development &amp; MbUnit</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>If you’re just starting out with test-driven development, install the default
            options shown in <xref linkend="chapter_Installation"/> and start reading from <xref
              linkend="chapter_MyFirstTests"/> to the end of the book.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>Those who want to move to MbUnit v3 from another test framework or MbUnit v2</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>The assumption here is that you are already familiar with a test framework and want
            to know how to switch to MbUnit v3. Use <xref linkend="appendix_MigrationGuide"/> to
            see how the attributes and features in your framework compare up to MbUnit and <xref
              linkend="chapter_MbUnitFundamentals"/>, <xref linkend="chapter_TestingRecipesOne"/>,
              <xref linkend="chapter_TestingRecipesTwo"/>, and <xref linkend="chapter_DomainTesting"
            /> to find more detail on the specific implementation in MbUnit v3. <xref
              linkend="chapter_TestReports"/> demonstrates how to interpret the results of your
            tests once you are up and running and <xref linkend="chapter_MyFirstTests"/> shows how
            you can run your current tests in Gallio while you make the switch. <xref
              linkend="chapter_ExtendingMbUnit"/> covers how to extend the base MbUnit functionality
            with your own custom code.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>Those who just want to use Gallio to run their tests</term>
        <listitem>
          <para>If you’re happy using your current test framework but would like to leverage Gallio
            as the platform to run your tests, <xref linkend="chapter_ExtendingMbUnit"/> shows how
            you can run your current tests in Gallio, and <xref linkend="chapter_MyFirstTests"/>,
            how to debug into your code using Gallio. <xref linkend="chapter_TestReports"/> covers
            how to use the reports generated by Gallio after a test report and <xref
              linkend="chapter_AutomatedTestingWithGallio"/> looks at how to integrate it into an
            automated test build.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
    <para>If you’d like to contribute to the Gallio or MbUnit code base with your own fixes and
      features, check out <xref linkend="part_Developing"/> on how to start.</para>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_StructureOfTheBook">
    <title>Structure Of The Book</title>
    <para> This book is broadly divided into three sections: </para>
    <orderedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>Section 1 is all about using Gallio and MbUnit to build your own applications.</para>
        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_Installation">Installation</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Walks you through the various options you have to install Gallio and MbUnit and
                the applications it can hook into.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_MyFirstTests">My First Tests</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Explains the basics of test-driven development and uses MbUnit to write tests
                for a basic application. You’ll see how to run those tests first in Gallio’s native
                applications, Icarus and Echo, and then within other applications for which Gallio
                has a plug-in. You’ll also see tests written with other frameworks all run together
                within Gallio.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_MbUnitFundamentals">MbUnit Fundamentals</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Building on Chapter 2, you’ll look at the basic class and method attributes
                provided in MbUnit v3 for test construction. You’ll see how to structure your
                application projects for testing, and step into your own code from running tests to
                debug it when your tests fail.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_TestingRecipesOne">Testing Recipes 1</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Discusses some of the core features in MbUnit which have made it one of the more
                popular test frameworks today. You’ll look at row tests, how to supply metadata to
                tests from various resources, creating test factories, contract verifiers and how to
                order tests. We’ll also cover how to run your tests in parallel and the problems
                that can create, as well as how to dynamic generate tests within ‘test
                suites’.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_TestingRecipesTwo">Testing Recipes 2</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Looks at the various options you have to influence the tests you’ve written from
                outside the test classes themselves. You’ll see how to use test assembly config
                files, the assembly decorators provided by MbUnit v3, inclusion and exclusion
                filters, and mock objects.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_DomainTesting">Domain Testing</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Covers scenarios where MbUnit is being used to test specific domains. We’ll look
                at testing database scripts and data access layers, web testing, and unit testing a
                more generic domain model with Moq and Rhino.Mocks. Finally, we’ll look at how to
                deal with elevating privileges and the dreaded Vista\Win 7 UAC in your tests.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_TestReports">Test Reports</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Looks at the various types of report that Gallio generates after a test run, how
                to navigate them and how to customize their contents to your requirements.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_ExtendingMbUnit">Extending MbUnit</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>Takes the bonnet off the MbUnit engine and looks at how you can extend its core
                functionality with your own.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><link linkend="chapter_AutomatedTestingWithGallio">Automated Testing With
                Gallio</link></term>
            <listitem>
              <para>For those who use automated test servers or who would like to get started
                building one, this chapter looks at how to control Gallio with various build engines
                and how to integrate it into complementary applications such Cruise Control,
                TeamCity or nCover.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>Section 2 is all about contributing to the MbUnit and Gallio project and will be
          developed further once section 1 is complete.</para>
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para><link linkend="chapter_GallioDevelopmentBasics">Development Basics</link></para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para><link linkend="chapter_CreatingGallioPlugins">Creating Gallio
              Plug-ins</link></para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para><link linkend="chapter_CreatingTestFrameworks">Creating Test
              Frameworks</link></para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para> Section 3 is the reference area containing a number of appendices for quick
          reference. </para>
        <itemizedlist>
          <listitem>
            <para><link linkend="appendix_MigrationGuide">Migration Guide From MbUnit v2 to MbUnit
                v3</link></para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para><link linkend="appendix_Copyright">A copy of the Creative Commons Attribution
                License, under which this book is licensed.</link></para>
          </listitem>
          <listitem>
            <para><link linkend="glossary">Glossary of Terms</link></para>
          </listitem>
        </itemizedlist>
      </listitem>
    </orderedlist>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_ThisBookIsFree">
    <title>This Book Is Free</title>
    <para> One of the biggest problems in many open source projects is the lack of proper
      documentation. This is a shame because there is no point in implementing a thousand features
      if no one knows about them. The Gallio development team was very aware of this issue, so
      documentation was given a high priority from the beginning of the project. The API reference
      documentation, which is automatically generated from the source code, was the first sign of
      this concern, but the team knew users need more: they need a guide to show them how to use the
      multiple features, the runners and so on under different scenarios. So the idea of writing a
      book was there from the beginning, in our wishlist, but we knew it was a big task so it was
      postponed. </para>
    <para> This book is an evolution of the documentation written in various forms (wikis, blog
      posts, etc) by MbUnit and Gallio developers into a single work. As such, it has always been
      under a free license (see <xref linkend="appendix_Copyright"/>) and two things will remain
      true: </para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>You will always find the latest version of this book in the book's own <link
            xmlns:ns1="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
            ns1:href="http://code.google.com/p/mb-unit/source/browse/">Subversion
          repository</link>.</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>You can make changes to this book and redistribute it however you wish—it's under a
          free license. Your only obligation is to maintain proper attribution to the original
          authors. Of course, we'd much rather you send feedback and patches to the Gallio developer
          community, instead of distributing your private version of this book.</para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    <para> The online home of this book's development and most of the volunteer-driven translation
      efforts regarding it is <link xmlns:ns1="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
        ns1:href="http://www.gallio.org/Docs.aspx">http://www.gallio.org/Docs.aspx</link>. There you
      can find links to the latest releases and tagged versions of the book in various formats, as
      well as instructions for accessing the book's Subversion repository (where its DocBook XML
      source code lives). Feedback is welcomed—encouraged, even. Please submit all comments,
      complaints, and patches against the book sources to <link
        xmlns:ns1="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" ns1:href="mailto:gallio-book@googlegroups.com"
        >gallio-book@googlegroups.com</link>. </para>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_WhatIsMbUnit">
    <title>What Is MbUnit?</title>
    <para> MbUnit is a unit testing framework in the tradition of xUnit frameworks such as JUnit. In
      addition, MbUnit includes a rich suite of features designed to simplify other automation tasks
      that arise during integration testing. The present incarnation of MbUnit, MbUnit v3,
      represents a complete rewrite and redesign of Peli's original work to improve the end-user
      experience, consolidate features, enhance extensibility, and enable advanced integration
      testing and reporting. </para>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para> MbUnit v3 is a .Net 2.0 based framework. It uses generic types and methods where
          possible to encourage code reuse. It also provides additional features for .Net 3.5
          clients in a separate assembly. MbUnit v3 leverages the Gallio test automation platform
          heavily to provide integration with numerous other tools and to enable functionality such
          as rich reporting. </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para> MbUnit v2 is a .Net 1.1 based framework with a few .Net 2.0 add-ons. It is
          stand-alone framework that includes its own suite of test runners. Gallio includes an
          adapter plugin so that Gallio-based tools may also be used with MbUnit v2 (when running
          tests in a .Net 2.0 environment). However, since MbUnit v2 was not originally designed for
          Gallio, it does not provide as many advanced features as MbUnit v3. </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    <para> MbUnit v2 is being maintained concurrently with MbUnit v3 for the benefit of existing
      projects based on MbUnit v2 that have not yet migrated to MbUnit v3. For new projects, we
      recommend adopting MbUnit v3. </para>
    <para> MbUnit v3 is mostly backwards compatible with MbUnit v2 except for some APIs that have
      been renamed or redesigned. Transitioning to MbUnit v2 is relatively straightforward. </para>
    <para> For more information about the differences between MbUnit v2 and v3, please refer to
        <xref linkend="appendix_MigrationGuide"/>. </para>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_WhatIsGallio">
    <title>What Is Gallio?</title>
    <para> The Gallio Automation Platform is an open, extensible, and neutral system for .NET that
      provides a common object model, runtime services and tools (such as test runners) that may be
      leveraged by any number of test frameworks. </para>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_History">
    <title>The History Of Gallio &amp; MbUnit</title>
    <para> In January 2004 Marc Clifton, a frequent contributor at Codeproject, wrote a series of
      articles that sought to expand the unit testing discussion. Among other things, Marc proposed
      a formalization of various test patterns beyond basic TDD. Marc then took his ideas into code
      as AUT (Advanced Unit Testing), an independed project that you can find at Codeproject.</para>
    <para> Two months later, Jonathan "Peli" de Halleux took a look at Marc's proposals and created
      gUnit (which was later renamed to MbUnit) while recovering from surgery in a hospital. In
      fact, Peli wrote most of MbUnit while still in the hospital.</para>
    <para> MbUnit had some new ideas and concepts and it caught the attention of Jamie Cansdale who
      while on a trip to Brussels hooked up with Peli to work on an add-on for TD.net. TD.net
      started life as a NUnit project and so this made MbUnit the next framework after NUnit to be
      supported by TD.net, as such since the very early days of this great tool there has been
      MbUnit support.</para>
    <para> In 2005 Peli made MbUnit opensource and continued working on the framework while
      finishing his PhD. Shortly after completing his PhD he accepted a job with Microsoft as a
        <glossterm linkend="glossary_SDET">SDET</glossterm> on the CLR team. Unable to carry on MbUnit, he handed it over
      to Jamie Cansdale as short time caretaker. Peli blogged about needing someone to take on
      MbUnit and shortly after Andy Stopford as a long time MbUnit user read this and stepped
      up.</para>
    <para> Since then MbUnit has grown as a framework and project, with two major releases and
      triple the downloads per release it has firmly rooted itself in main stream Microsoft .net
      culture as a viable unit test framework next to NUnit.</para>
    <para> In the autumn of 2007, MbUnit v3 - a ground up rewrite of MbUnit, started. In one of
      those funny turn of events, v3 was to be code named <emphasis>Galileo</emphasis> but due to a typo became
      <emphasis>Gallio</emphasis>. The name stuck and development continued on MbUnit v3, code name: Gallio.</para>
    <para> With MbUnit v3 development well under way, long time MbUnit core member Jeff Brown
      attended the <glossterm linkend="glossary_AltNet">Alt.Net</glossterm> conference in Austin, Texas. Following discussions with other programmers
      at the conference, Jeff made the case to the MbUnit team that there was value to the community
      at large in isolating the test runner capabilities of the system to create a neutral platform
      upon which MbUnit could then be hosted as one of many supported frameworks. Other open-source
      and commercial projects would be able to leverage the platform's services to create rich,
      interoperable and extensible testing solutions, thereby adding great value to the
      community.</para>
    <para> After much discussion, the decision was made to separate the test runner from MbUnit and
      Gallio the Automation Platform was born.</para>
    <para> Going forward the Gallio Project seeks to become visible to other open source projects so
      that the capabilities of the platform can bring unity and value to the many projects in the
      testing space.</para>
  </section>
  <section xml:id="preface_WhatsNew">
    <title> What’s New In Gallio &amp; MbUnit? </title>
    <para> The first version of this book is aimed for release during the v3.1 life-cycle. A quick
      run-down of new features in subsequent version will be found here. Full release notes can be
      found at <link xmlns:ns1="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"
        ns1:href="http://www.gallio.org/Docs.aspx">http://www.gallio.org/Docs.aspx</link>. </para>
  </section>
</preface>
