<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<glossary xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" version="5.0" xml:id="glossary">
  <title>Glossary</title>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>A</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_altNet">
      <glossterm>Alt.Net</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>
        A community of .NET developers who embrace tools, techniques and knowledge from all
        development communities, and not just Microsoft's own tooling and guidance.
      </para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_ambience">
      <glossterm>Ambience</glossterm>
      <glossdef>
        <para>Gallio's own utility for storing persistent data across multiple test runs.</para>
      </glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>C</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_ccNet">
      <glossterm>CruiseControl.NET</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A free and open source build management and continuous integration server written in
        C#.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_csUnit">
      <glossterm>csUnit</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A unit-testing framework written in C++. Tests written against csUnit can be
        run by Gallio.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>E</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_echo">
      <glossterm>Echo</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>The Gallio project command-line based test runner</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_extremeProgramming">
      <glossterm>Extreme Programming</glossterm>
      <acronym>XP</acronym>
      <glossdef>
        <para>
          A type of agile software development,advocating frequent "releases" in short development
          cycles. The idea is to improve developer productivity and create points in the process where 
          new customer requirements can be included into the software specification.
        </para>
      </glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>G</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_gallio">
      <glossterm>Gallio</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>The framework-neutral Automation Platform half of the Gallio project, written in C#.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_gUnit">
      <glossterm>gUnit</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>The original name for MbUnit.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>I</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_icarus">
      <glossterm>Icarus</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>The Gallio project's GUI-based test runner</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_ironPython">
      <glossterm>IronPython.NET</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>An implementation of the Python programming language running under .NET and
        Silverlight.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry> 
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_ironRuby">
      <glossterm>IronRuby.NET</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>An implementation of the Ruby programming language running under .NET and
        Silverlight.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>    
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>J</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_jUnit">
      <glossterm>jUnit</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A unit-testing framework written in Java.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>M</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_mbUnit">
      <glossterm>MbUnit</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>The unit-testing framework half of the Gallio project, written in C#.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_msBuild">
      <glossterm>MSBuild</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A build platform with an XML syntax built into Visual Studio.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_msTest">
      <glossterm>MSTest</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>The unit-testing framework built into Visual Studio.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>T</title>
    <glossentry >
      <glossterm>TeamCity</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>TeamCity is a Java-based build management and continuous integration server.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>  
  <glossdiv>
    <title>N</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_nAnt">
      <glossterm>nAnt</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A free and open source build platform with an XML syntax.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_nBehave">
      <glossterm>nBehave</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>One of the first behavior-driven development frameworks written in C#. Tests
        written against nBehave can be run by
        Gallio.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_nCover">
      <glossterm>nCover</glossterm>
      <glossdef>
        <para>A code coverage tool measuring how much of your code is run by the tests you have
          written.</para>
      </glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_nUnit">
      <glossterm>nUnit</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>One of the first unit-testing frameworks written in C#. Tests written against nUnit can be run by
        Gallio.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>O</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_objectARX">
      <glossterm>ObjectARX</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>ObjectARX (AutoCAD Runtime Extension) is an API for customizing and extending AutoCAD.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>R</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_resharper">
      <glossterm>Resharper</glossterm>
      <acronym>R#</acronym>
      <glossdef><para>A refactoring plug-in for Visual Studio. It has a test runner which can use
        Gallio to run tests written against any framework that Gallio supports.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_rSpec">
      <glossterm>RSpec</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>The original Behaviour Driven Development framework for Ruby</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>S</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_sdet">
      <glossterm>Software Development Engineer in Test</glossterm>
      <acronym>SDET</acronym>
      <glossdef><para>
        A development role at Microsoft that sees a product through two phases of the software
        lifecycle - Development and Testing.
      </para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>T</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_teamCity">
      <glossterm>TeamCity</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A build management and continuous integration server. It has a test runner which can use
        Gallio to run tests written against any framework that Gallio supports.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_tdd">
      <glossterm>Test-Driven Development</glossterm>
      <acronym>TDD</acronym>
      <glossdef>
        <para>A style of software development with four simple steps. 
          <orderedlist>
            <listitem><para>Create a test case for code that fails.</para></listitem>
            <listitem><para>Write code so the test case and all other test cases pass.</para></listitem>
            <listitem><para>Refactor all the code so there are no code smells and the test cases
            still pass</para></listitem>
            <listitem><para>Repeat</para></listitem>
          </orderedlist>
          </para>
      </glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_testDriven.NET">
      <glossterm>TestDriven.NET</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>TestDriven.NET is a plug-in for Visual Studio that allows you to run or debug their
        (non-MSTest) tests from within Visual Studio</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_testRunner">
      <glossterm>Test Runner</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A test runner is a program or plug-in for other programs that provide different ways to run tests through Gallio
      </para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>    
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_typeMock">
      <glossterm>TypeMock</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>A mock object framework written in C#.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>    
  </glossdiv>
  <glossdiv>
    <title>X</title>
    <glossentry xml:id="glossary_xUnit">
      <glossterm>xUnit</glossterm>
      <glossdef><para>One of the newer unit-testing frameworks written in C#, written from scratch
        by some members of the nUnit team based on their experience with that. Tests written
        against xUnit can be run by Gallio.</para></glossdef>
    </glossentry>
  </glossdiv>
</glossary>
